# Avoid implementation details

## Takeaways

### Accessibility to help

If we want to decide how to best access an element on the screen, we can open Chrome DevTools' `Elements` tab and then its `Accessibility ` page to see how the screen readers visualize it.

Another option is to use the `Testing Playground` Chrome extension, which when installed appears next to the `Accessibility` page. This one can give a hint on the JavaScript code to try. They also have a website with the playground: <https://testing-playground.com>

### userEvent as much as possible

When the user clicks on things, they are firing all kinds of events like pointer events, mouse events. If they're using keyboard, then they're going to be doing key events. It would be great if instead of just firing the click event, we've fired all of those events to ensure that our test is resembling the way that our software is going to be used in production as closely as possible.

Instead of `fireEvent`, we can then better use `userEvent`. Roughly speaking, the only difference between `fireEvent` and `userEvent` is that, while `fireEvent`, fires only one specific event, `userEvent` is going to fire a bunch of different events that are associated with this typical user interaction of a click. `userEvent` does fire a `mouseDown` and a `mouseUp`, as well as several other events that are typically fired when a user clicks on a particular area of the UI.

In the latest version of RTL, it is further advised not to use `userEvent` methods directly not in `beforeXxx` hooks but to setup a user object in each test.

First, we create a `setup` function:

```ts
// setup function
function setup(jsx) {
  return {
    user: userEvent.setup(),
    // Import `render` from the framework library of your choice.
    // See https://testing-library.com/docs/dom-testing-library/install#wrappers
    ...render(jsx),
  }
}
```

Then we can use this function in our tests (notice that we use the async/await syntax):

```ts
test('counter increments and decrements when the buttons are clicked', async () => {
  const {user} = setup(<Counter />)

	const message = screen.getByText(/current count:/i)
  const decrement = screen.getByRole('button', {name: /decrement/i})
  const increment = screen.getByRole('button', {name: /increment/i})

  expect(message).toHaveTextContent('Current count: 0')
  await user.click(increment)
  expect(message).toHaveTextContent('Current count: 1')
  await user.click(decrement)
  expect(message).toHaveTextContent('Current count: 0')
})
```

## Background

One of the most important things to remember about testing our software the way it is used is to avoid testing implementation details. "Implementation details" is a term referring to how an abstraction accomplishes a certain outcome. Thanks to the expressiveness of code, you can typically accomplish the same outcome using completely different implementation details. For example:

```javascript
multiply(4, 5) // 20
```

The `multiply` function can be implemented in basically infinite ways. Here are two examples:

```javascript
const multiply = (a, b) => a * b
```

vs

```javascript
function multiply(a, b) {
  let total = 0
  for (let i = 0; i < b; i++) {
    total += a
  }
  return total
}
```

One of those is more clear than the other, but that's irrelevant to the point:

> The implementation of your abstractions __does not matter__ to the users of your abstraction and if you want to have confidence that it continues to work through refactors then __neither should your tests.__

Here's a React example of this:

```javascript
function Counter() {
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0)
  const increment = () => setCount(c => c + 1)
  return <button onClick={increment}>{count}</button>
}
```

Here's one way you might access that `button` to click and assert on it:

```javascript
const {container} = render(<Counter />)
container.firstChild // <-- that's the button
```

However, what if we changed it a bit:

```javascript
function Counter() {
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0)
  const increment = () => setCount(c => c + 1)
  return (
    <span>
      <button onClick={increment}>{count}</button>
    </span>
  )
}
```

Our tests would break!

The only difference between these implementations is one wraps the button in a `span` and the other does not. The user does not observe or care about this difference, so we should write our tests in a way that passes in either case.

So here's a better way to search for that button in our test that's implementation detail free and refactor friendly:

```javascript
render(<Counter />)
screen.getByText('0') // <-- that's the button
// or (even better) you can do this:
screen.getByRole('button', {name: '0'}) // <-- that's the button
```

📜 Read up on `screen` here:
https://testing-library.com/docs/dom-testing-library/api-queries#screen

Both of those resembles the way the user will search for our increment button.

📜 Read more about
[Testing Implementation Details](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/testing-implementation-details) and how to [Avoid the Test User](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/avoid-the-test-user)

📜 Learn more about the queries built-into React Testing Library from
[the query docs](https://testing-library.com/docs/dom-testing-library/api-queries).

## Exercise

Our current tests rely on implementation details. You can tell whether tests rely on implementation details if they're written in a way that would fail if the implementation changes. For example, what if we wrapped our counter component in another `div` or swapped our message from a `div` to a `span` or `p`? Or what if we added another button for `reset`? Or what if instead of a `button` we switched to a clickable (and accessible) `div`? (That's not an easy thing to do, so I recommend just using a button, but the point is hopefully clear).

Each of these things are implementation details that none of our users should know or care about, so this exercise is intended to help you learn to avoid implementation details by querying for and interacting with the elements in a way that is implementation detail free and refactor friendly.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 use userEvent

As it turns out, clicking these buttons is also a bit of an implementation detail. We're firing a single event, when we actually should be firing several other events like the user does. When a user clicks a button, they first have to move their mouse over the button which will fire some mouse events. They'll also mouse down and mouse up on the input and focus it! Lots of events!

If we want to be truly implementation detail free, then we should probably fire all those same events too. Luckily for us, Testing Library has us covered with `@testing-library/user-event`. This may one-day be baked directly into `@testing-library/dom`, but for now it's in a separate package.

For this extra credit, swap out `fireEvent` for `userEvent` which you can get like so:

```javascript
import userEvent from '@testing-library/user-event'
```

Once you're done, look around in the code of `@testing-library/user-event`'s [`click` method](https://github.com/testing-library/user-event/blob/1af67066f57377c5ab758a1215711dddabad2d83/src/index.js#L109-L131).
It's pretty interesting!

NOTE: In the latest version of `@testing-library/user-event`, all methods return
a promise, so make sure you `await` the result of `userEvent.click`!

## 🦉 Elaboration and Feedback

After the instruction, if you want to remember what you've just learned, then
fill out the elaboration and feedback form:

https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Testing%20React%20Applications%20%F0%9F%A7%90&e=03%3A%20Avoid%20implementation%20details&em=
