# Mocking HTTP requests

## Takeaways

### Tips and Tricks

`waitForElementToBeRemoved` is a handy tool to test all sorts of spinners we show on the screen while waiting for the API call to return.

### MSW Server Handlers

In order to be able to use the same server handlers both for our tests and for the real UI while developing it, we can place them into, e.g., `test/server-handlers.js` and then import them in our tests and send them along into the `setupServer` call:

```ts
import { handlers } from '../../test/server-handlers'
...
const server = setupServer(...handlers)
```

Sometimes we might want to override the standard behavior of our application wide handlers in a specific unit test. Doing that inside the `server-handlers` can be tricky as we may introduce some strange UI behavior or break other tests that don't care about our special case.

No worry! We can override the handlers on a per-test basis with `server.use()` function by specifying our special handler as an argument. We only have to make sure that this override does not influence other tests following this special test by resetting handlers:

```ts
afterEach(() => server.resetHandlers())
```

### Snapshot Testing

> CAUTION: as of 06-08-2023 the snapshot tests using `inlineSnapshots` may fail.
> Jest is not yet compatible with `Prettier` v3, causing snapshot updates to fail
> with the following error:
>
> ```
> TypeError: prettier.resolveConfig.sync is not a function
>     at runPrettier (node_modules/jest-snapshot/build/InlineSnapshots.js:308:30)
> ```
>
> So, for the time being stay with `Prettier` v2.

Using inline snapshots is super handy as then we don't need to care about the exact error message we are getting from the API. Because otherwise we would need to change our unit test each time somebody changes the error message there. So, instead of specifying the exact text string

```ts
expect(screen.getByText(username)).toBeInTheDocument()
```

we can not simply write

```ts
expect(screen.getByRole('alert').textContent).toMatchInlineSnapshot()
```

Then on the first run our line of code here will automagically change into something like this:

```ts
expect(screen.getByRole('alert').textContent).toMatchInlineSnapshot(
	`"username required"`,
)
```

Now, if the actual error message changes, our test will fail with a message suggesting us either to fix the bug or to update the snapshot by clicking <kbd>u</kbd> in our test console. The test will rerun and update the error message in our snapshot. 😃

## Background

Testing that our frontend code interacts with the backend is important. It's how the user uses our applications, so it's what our tests should do as well if we want the maximum confidence. However, there are several challenges that come with doing that. The setup required to make this work is non-trivial. It is definitely important that we test that integration, but we can do that with a suite of solid E2E tests using a tool like [Cypress](https://cypress.io).

For our Integration and Unit component tests, we're going to trade-off some confidence for convenience and we'll make up for that with E2E tests. So for all of our Jest tests, we'll start up a mock server to handle all of the `window.fetch` requests we make during our tests.

> Because `window.fetch` isn't supported in JSDOM/Node, we have the `whatwg-fetch` module installed which will polyfill fetch in our testing environment which will allow MSW to handle those requests for us. This is setup automatically in our jest config thanks to `react-scripts`.

To handle these fetch requests, we're going to start up a "server" which is not actually a server, but simply a request interceptor. This makes it really easy to get things setup (because we don't have to worry about finding an available port for the server to listen to and making sure we're making requests to the right port) and it also allows us to mock requests made to other domains.

We'll be using a tool called [MSW](https://mswjs.io/) for this. Here's an example of how you can use msw for tests:

```javascript
// __tests__/fetch.test.js
import * as React from 'react'
import {rest} from 'msw'
import {setupServer} from 'msw/node'
import {render, waitForElementToBeRemoved, screen} from '@testing-library/react'
import {userEvent} from '@testing-library/user-event'
import Fetch from '../fetch'

const server = setupServer(
  rest.get('/greeting', (req, res, ctx) => {
    return res(ctx.json({greeting: 'hello there'}))
  }),
)

beforeAll(() => server.listen())
afterEach(() => server.resetHandlers())
afterAll(() => server.close())

test('loads and displays greeting', async () => {
  render(<Fetch url="/greeting" />)

  await userEvent.click(screen.getByText('Load Greeting'))

  await waitForElementToBeRemoved(() => screen.getByText('Loading...'))

  expect(screen.getByRole('heading')).toHaveTextContent('hello there')
  expect(screen.getByRole('button')).toHaveAttribute('disabled')
})

test('handles server error', async () => {
  server.use(
    rest.get('/greeting', (req, res, ctx) => {
      return res(ctx.status(500))
    }),
  )

  render(<Fetch url="/greeting" />)

  await userEvent.click(screen.getByText('Load Greeting'))

  await waitForElementToBeRemoved(() => screen.getByText('Loading...'))

  expect(screen.getByRole('alert')).toHaveTextContent('Oops, failed to fetch!')
  expect(screen.getByRole('button')).not.toHaveAttribute('disabled')
})
```

That should give you enough to go on, but if you'd like to check out the docs,
please do!

📜 [MSW](https://mswjs.io/)

## Exercise

In the last exercise you wrote a test for the Login form by itself, now you'll
be writing a test that connects that login form with a backend request for when
the user submits the form.

We'll use `waitForElementToBeRemoved` to wait for the loading indicator to go
away.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 reuse server request handlers

In my applications, I love having a mock server to use during development. It's
often more reliable, works offline, doesn't require a lot of environment setup,
and allows me to start writing UI for APIs that aren't finished yet.

MSW was actually originally built for this use case and we've already
implemented this server handler for our app in `test/server-handlers.js`, so for
this extra credit, import that array of server handlers and send it along into
the `setupServer` call.

### 2. 💯 test the unhappy path

Add a test for what happens if the response to our login request is a failure.
Our server handlers already handle situations where the username or password are
not provided, so you can simply not fill one of those values in and then you'll
want to make sure the error message is displayed.

### 3. 💯 use inline snapshots for error messages

Copy and pasting output into your test assertion (like the error message in our
last extra credit) is no fun. Especially if that error message were to change in
the future.

Instead, we can use a special assertion to take a "snapshot" of the error
message and Jest will update our code for us. Use `toMatchInlineSnapshot` rather
than an explicit assertion on that error element.

📜 [Snapshot Testing](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/snapshot-testing)

### 4. 💯 use one-off server handlers

How would we test a situation where the server fails for some unknown reason?
There are plenty of situations where we want to test what happens when the
_server_ misbehaves. But we don't want to code those scenarios in our
application-wide server handlers for two reasons:

1. It clutters our application-wide handlers. Lots of the same problems of CSS
   applies here: people are afraid to modify or delete any code because they're
   uncertain what other code will break as a result.
2. The indirection makes the tests harder to understand.

[Read more about the benefits of colocation](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/colocation).

So instead, we want one-off server handlers to be written directly in the test
that needs it. This is what MSW's `server.use` API is for. It allows you to add
server handlers after the server has already started. And the
`server.resetHandlers()` allows you to remove those added handlers between tests
to preserve test isolation and restore the original handlers.

See if you can add another test to check a situation for when the server
misbehaves and sends a status code 500 error.

💰 Here's something to get you started:

```javascript
server.use(
  rest.post(
    // note that it's the same URL as our app-wide handler
    // so this will override the other.
    'https://auth-provider.example.com/api/login',
    async (req, res, ctx) => {
      // your one-off handler here
    },
  ),
)
```

## 🦉 Elaboration and Feedback

After the instruction, if you want to remember what you've just learned, then
fill out the elaboration and feedback form:

https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Testing%20React%20Applications%20%F0%9F%A7%90&e=05%3A%20mocking%20HTTP%20requests&em=
