# Mocking Browser APIs and modules

## Takeaways

### Intermezzo

Reading Kent's
[But really, what is a JavaScript mock?](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/but-really-what-is-a-javascript-mock)
article, I have finally got it how to use the `__mocks__` folder. We create a
`__mocks__` directory right next to the file that we want to mock, and then
create a file with the same name, e.g., `utils`:

```
path/to/utils/
â”œâ”€â”€ __mocks__
â”‚   â””â”€â”€ utils.js
â”œâ”€â”€ __tests__/
â”‚   â””â”€â”€ thumb-war.test.js
â”œâ”€â”€ thumb-war.js
â””â”€â”€ utils.js
```

Inside the `__mocks__/utils.js` file, we put our mock implementation:

```js
// __mocks__/utils.js
export const getWinner = jest.fn((p1, p2) => p2)
```

Then inside `__tests__/thumb-war.test.js`, we simply write:

```js
// __tests__/thumb-war.test.js
import thumbWar from '../thumb-war'
import * as utilsMock from '~/utils'

jest.mock('~/utils')
...
```

We only make a hint that our `utils` should be mocked and Jest will
automatically use the mock implementation from the `__mocks__` folder.

### Tips & Tricks

Kent's `deferred()` function is a great technique to test situations when our application has a pending state while waiting for the promise to resolve and while waiting shows some spinner or smth. This function gives us a possibility to first check that we see the spinner while the state is pending, and then again that the test sees the right things on the "screen" when we manually resolve the promise.

Another tip is to use `act()` around our promise resolve command if the corresponding action updates the state and we get the famous `act()` warning.

I noticed however that the DOM was not being updated without the resolution being wrapped in `act()`, which was not the case in the Kent's video. No idea why. Maybe because I updated some npm packages? ðŸ¤”

### Mocking out the Module

Instead of mocking out the function that is not available to Jest running a `nodejs` process, we can mock out the whole third party module. In our case, `Location` uses `react-use-geolocation` package.

```js
jest.mock('react-use-geolocation')
```

What this is going to do is Jest will look for all the exports from `react-use-geolocation`, and for any of those that are functions, it's going to create a `jest.fn()` mock function automatically for us.

We then mock out the `useCurrentPosition` hook that is returned from it.

```js
import { useCurrentPosition } from 'react-use-geolocation'
...
// in our test
let setReturnValue
function useMockCurrentPosition() {
	// our state is an array because useCurrentPosition returns an array
	const state = React.useState([])
	setReturnValue = state[1] // second element in state array is the setter
	return state[0] // first element in state array is the state value (i.e. position)
}
useCurrentPosition.mockImplementation(useMockCurrentPosition)
```

Finally, instead of resolving any promise, we just set the return value to our `fakePosition`:

```js
act(() => {
	setReturnValue([fakePosition])
})
```

Again, this test needs to be wrapped in `act()`, because we're calling a state updater function. We just want to make sure that React flushes all of the side effects that are going to be triggered as a result of this state update before we continue with the rest of our test.

When `useCurrentPosition` is called, it's going to be calling `useMockCurrentPosition`, which is technically a hook. It's using React `useState`, but we're taking that state updater value and assigning it to something that we can call ourselves. It's returning the state value, which at the very beginning is just the empty array. We get `position` is undefined, `error` is undefined, which will result in this spinner showing up. That allows us to verify that the spinner is in the document.

We want to trigger a state update from our test. We're going to say, "Hey, act. I'm going to do some sort of action and when I'm all done, I want you to flush all of the side effects." The action that we take is to set the return value to this array that has our `fakePosition`.That will trigger a re-render in any component that's using `useCurrentPosition`. This time, when we say state at position , it's going to be this array that has a `fakePosition`.

We come back to this location, we call `useCurrentPosition`, which is our `useMockCurrentPosition`. This is going to give us our `fakePosition`, which will ultimately result in rendering this `latitude` and `longitude`. We can make all of those assertions to ensure that our component is working properly.

### Testing the rejection

We have two options how to implement such a test: by mocking the browser API (`06.extra-2.js`) and by mocking our custom module (`06.extra-3.js`).

#### Mocking the Browser API

When mocking the browser API, we import and mock the whole 3d party package:

```js
import { useCurrentPosition } from 'react-use-geolocation'

jest.mock('react-use-geolocation')
```

Then in our test, we write the mock implementation for the `useCurrentPosition` hook:

```js
const errorMessage = 'Something went wrong!'
const fakeError = {
	message: errorMessage,
}
let setReturnValue
function useMockCurrentPosition() {
	// our state is an array because useCurrentPosition returns an array
	const state = React.useState([])
	setReturnValue = state[1] // second element in state array is the setter
	return [null, fakeError]
}
useCurrentPosition.mockImplementation(useMockCurrentPosition)
```

Our mock hook now returns the `fakeError`, we only need to trigger it by setting the return value:

```js
act(() => {
	setReturnValue([fakePosition])
})
```

#### Mocking our Custom Module

When mocking our custom module, we import the 3d party package if necessary but we mock only the function that we actually call in `Location`:

```js
beforeAll(() => {
  window.navigator.geolocation = {
    getCurrentPosition: jest.fn(),
  }
})
```

Now, using the wonderful `deferred` helper tool of KcD, we write the following mock implementation of the `getCurrentPosition` function:

```js
const fakePosition = {
	coords: {
		latitude: 52,
		longitude: 4,
	},
}
const errorMessage = 'Something went wrong!'
const fakeError = {
	message: errorMessage,
}

// ðŸ¨ create a deferred promise here
const { promise, reject } = deferred()

window.navigator.geolocation.getCurrentPosition.mockImplementation(
	(successCallback, errorCallback) => {
		promise.then(() => {
			console.log('promise resolved')
			successCallback(fakePosition)
		}).catch(() => {
			console.log('promise rejected')
			errorCallback(fakeError)
		})
	},
)
```

Note that we are using the default signature of the real `getCurrentPosition` function.

Now, our action is mainly calling the `reject(fakeError)`:

```js
await act(async () => {
	try {
		reject(fakeError)
		await promise
	} catch (e) {
		console.log('catch: ' + e.message)
	}
})
```

## Background

Mocking HTTP requests is one thing, but sometimes you have entire Browser APIs
or modules that you need to mock. Every time you create a fake version of what
your code actually uses, you're "poking a hole in reality" and you lose some
confidence as a result (which is why E2E tests are critical). Remember, we're
doing it and recognizing that we're trading confidence for some practicality or
convenience in our testing. (Read more about this in my blog post:
[The Merits of Mocking](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/the-merits-of-mocking)).

To learn more about what "mocking" even is, take a look at my blog post
[But really, what is a JavaScript mock?](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/but-really-what-is-a-javascript-mock)

### Mocking Browser APIs

I need to tell you a little secret and I want you to promise me to not be mad...

Our tests aren't running in the browser ðŸ˜±ðŸ˜±ðŸ˜±ðŸ˜±ðŸ˜±

It's true. They're running in a _simulated_ browser environment in Node. This is
done thanks to a module called [jsdom](https://github.com/jsdom/jsdom). It does
its best to simulate the browser and implement standards. But there are some
things it's simply not capable of simulating today. One example is window resize
and media queries. In my
[Advanced React Hooks workshop](https://kentcdodds.com/workshops/advanced-react-hooks),
I teach something using a custom `useMedia` hook and to test it, I have to mock
out the browser `window.resizeTo` method and polyfill `window.matchMedia`.
Here's how I go about doing that:

```javascript
import matchMediaPolyfill from 'mq-polyfill'

beforeAll(() => {
  matchMediaPolyfill(window)
  window.resizeTo = function resizeTo(width, height) {
    Object.assign(this, {
      innerWidth: width,
      innerHeight: height,
      outerWidth: width,
      outerHeight: height,
    }).dispatchEvent(new this.Event('resize'))
  }
})
```

This allows me to continue to test with Jest (in node) while not actually
running in a browser.

So why do we go through all the trouble? Because the tools we currently have for
testing are WAY faster and WAY more capable when run in node. Most of the time,
you can mock browser APIs for your tests without losing too much confidence.
However, if you are testing something that really relies on browser APIs or
layout (like drag-and-drop) then you may be better served by writing those tests
in a real browser (using a tool like [Cypress](https://cypress.io)).

### Mocking Modules

Sometimes, a module is doing something you don't want to actually do in tests.
Jest makes it relatively simple to mock a module:

```javascript
// math.js
export const add = (a, b) => a + b
export const subtract = (a, b) => a - b

// __tests__/some-test.js
import { add, subtract } from '../math'

jest.mock('../math')

// now all the function exports from the "math.js" module are jest mock functions
// so we can call .mockImplementation(...) on them
// and make assertions like .toHaveBeenCalledTimes(...)
```

Additionally, if you'd like to mock only _parts_ of a module, you can provide
your own "mock module getter" function:

```javascript
jest.mock('../math', () => {
  const actualMath = jest.requireActual('../math')
  return {
    ...actualMath,
    subtract: jest.fn(),
  }
})

// now the `add` export is the normal function,
// but the `subtract` export is a mock function.
```

To learn a bit about how this works, take a look at my repo
[how-jest-mocking-works](https://github.com/kentcdodds/how-jest-mocking-works).
It's pretty fascinating.

There's a lot more to learn about the things you can do with Jest's module
mocking capabilities. You can also read the docs about this here:

ðŸ“œ [Manual Mocks](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/manual-mocks)

## Exercise

We've got a `Location` component that will request the user's location and then
display the latitude and longitude values on screen. And yup, you guessed it,
`window.navigator.geolocation.getCurrentPosition` is not supported by jsdom, so
we need to mock it out. We'll mock it with a jest mock function so we can call
[`mockImplementation`](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/mock-function-api#mockfnmockimplementationfn)
and mock what that function does for a particular test.

We'll also bump into one of the few situations you need to use
[`act`](https://reactjs.org/docs/test-utils.html#act) directly.
[Learn more](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/fix-the-not-wrapped-in-act-warning).

## Extra Credit

### 1. ðŸ’¯ mock the module

Sometimes, the module is interacting with browser APIs that are just too hard to
mock (like `canvas`) or you're comfortable relying on the module's own test
suite to give you confidence that so long as you use the module properly
everything should work.

In that case, it's reasonable to mock the module directly. So for this extra
credit, try to mock the module rather than the browser API it's using.

ðŸ’° tip, you're mocking a hook. Your mock implementation can also be a hook (so
you can use `React.useState`!).

### 2. ðŸ’¯ test the unhappy path

> NOTE: A recording of me doing this extra credit is not on EpicReact.Dev yet,
> but feel free to give it a try anyway!

Add a test for what happens in the event of an error. You can try it with the
module mocking approach, but in my solution, I go back to the function mocking
version.

## ðŸ¦‰ Elaboration and Feedback

After the instruction, if you want to remember what you've just learned, then
fill out the elaboration and feedback form:

https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Testing%20React%20Applications%20%F0%9F%A7%90&e=06%3A%20mocking%20Browser%20APIs%20and%20modules&em=
