# testing custom hooks

## Takeaways

> All right, I know what you've all been waiting for, you want to know how to test custom hooks. I don't know, maybe this will disappoint you, but _testing custom hooks directly is something you probably shouldn't do_.

> Most of the time, the custom hooks that you make are going to be used by one, maybe two components. You should just test those components and then your hook is going to be tested as _an implementation detail of those things_.

> However, _if you are building a reusable hook, or you have a library of hooks, or something like that_, then yeah, that's a pretty good situation for testing a custom hook, but the way that your software is going to be used is within a component. Maybe that's how you should test a custom hook.

### Testing a Hook by its Usage Example

Notice that when we test the `useCounter` hook through its usage example, the code  overage for the hook itself will be 100%!

### Testing a Hook by its Return Value

Sometimes our hooks are to complex to be testing via a usage example. Then we can use another technique, whereby we can use the results our custom hook returns without actually rendering the DOM. In this case we also don't need user events anymore because we're not interacting with the DOM. All we've got is a simple test component that assigns the return value (result) to whatever we get back from our hook. Then we interact with that result and make assertions on the state changes.

Here is an example of the test setup function to be used in each test:

```js
function setup(...args) {
  const returnVal = {}

  function TestComponent() {
    Object.assign(returnVal, useCounter(...args))
    return null
  }

  render(<TestComponent />)
  return returnVal
}
```

And here is an example of a test:

```js
test('exposes the count and increment/decrement functions', () => {
  const counter = setup()
  expect(counter.count).toBe(0)

   act(() => {
		 counter.increment()
	})

	expect(counter.count).toBe(1)

	 act(() => {
		 counter.decrement()
	})

	expect(counter.count).toBe(0)
})
```

Notice the usage of `act` here. As we are calling `increment` and `decrement` functions
that modify the internal state of the SUT component, the `act` function here is basically just telling React, "Hey, I'm going to do something that's going to trigger a state update. After my callback is all finished, I want you to flush all the side effects, the React `useEffect` callbacks and the such. So that my next line of code has a stable component to interact with and we don't end up with some sort of intermediary state where our effects haven't been run yet."

This was not necessary before because we were using `userEvent`, which wraps everything in `act` calls. It is now necessary because we are calling that setCount directly through this increment function call. Because of that, we have to manually wrap this in `act`.

### Watch the Variable Scopes!

KcD makes a good case for using `.current` property we often see, e.g., when passing refs. I always wondered why that would be necessary. In the extra 2 part of the excercise, he explains that: to avoid possible conflicts due to variable scopes.

Let us consider the function without `.current`:

```js
function setup({ initialProps } = {}) {
  const result = {}

  function TestComponent() {
    result = useCounter(initialProps)
    return null
  }

  render(<TestComponent />)
  return result
}
```

Now, our test will fail on the second assertion as the `count` will still be `0`.

```js
test('exposes the count and increment/decrement functions', () => {
  const result = setup()
  expect(result.count).toBe(0)
   act(() =>  result.increment())
  expect(result.count).toBe(1)
   act(() =>  result.decrement())
  expect(result.count).toBe(0)
})
```

Why? Because of the referential equality of the `result` variable inside the `setup` function and `result` variable we initialize inside our test. When we run the `increment` function on the result, it will rerender the `TestComponent`. Then the `result` variable inside the `setup` function will get a new reference address whereas the `result` variable inside our test will still be pointing to the same old location.

To fix that, we will assign the internal return value of our hook to `result.current`, which will not recreate the `result` variable itself. Here is the fixed `setup` function:

```js
function setup({ initialProps } = {}) {
  const result = {}

  function TestComponent() {
    result.current = useCounter(initialProps)
    return null
  }

  render(<TestComponent />)
  return result
}
```

and here is the fixed test:

```js
test('exposes the count and increment/decrement functions', () => {
  const result = setup()
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(0)

	 act(() =>  result.current.increment())
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(1)

	 act(() =>  result.current.decrement())
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(0)
})
```

### Testing a Hook using the React-Hooks Testing Library

> NOTE: Originally `renderHook` was part of `@testing-library/react-hooks`, but that functionality is currently merged directly into `@testing-library/react` .

The `renderHook` function is basically the React implementation of our `setup` function. Using it makes our life even simpler:

```js
test('exposes the count and increment/decrement functions', () => {
  const { result } = renderHook(() => useCounter())
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(0)

   act(() =>  result.current.increment())
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(1)

   act(() =>  result.current.decrement())
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(0)
})
```

If we can pass props to our custom hook, there are two ways we can do it.

Directly:

```js
test('exposes the count and increment/decrement functions', () => {
  const { result } = renderHook(() => useCounter({ step: 10 })
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(0)

   act(() =>  result.current.increment())
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(10)

   act(() =>  result.current.decrement())
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(0)
})
```

Or using the `initialProps` parameter:

```js
test('exposes the count and increment/decrement functions', () => {
  const { result } = renderHook(useCounter, { inititialProps: { step: 10 })
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(0)

   act(() =>  result.current.increment())
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(1)

   act(() =>  result.current.decrement())
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(0)
})
```

Using `rerender` is straightforward if we use the second notation:

```js
test('exposes the count and increment/decrement functions', () => {
  const { result, rerender } = renderHook(useCounter, { inititialProps: { step: 10 })
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(0)

   act(() =>  result.current.increment())
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(10)

  rerender({ step: 5 })
   act(() =>  result.current.decrement())
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(5)
})
```

The first, callback, notation requires some extra tricks:

```js
test('exposes the count and increment/decrement functions', () => {
  const { result, rerender } = renderHook((props) => useCounter({ step: 10, ...props }))
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(0)

   act(() =>  result.current.increment())
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(10)

  rerender({ step: 5 })
   act(() =>  result.current.decrement())
  expect(result.current.count).toBe(5)
})
```

This is because `rerender` passes its argument value directly as a prop for `renderHook` function, not our custom `useCounter` hook.

## Background

Testing custom hooks is a common question as well. Step back and think about how our guiding testing principle applies to this situation: the more your tests resemble the way your software is used, the more confidence they can give you. How is your custom hook used? It's used in a component! So that's how it should be tested.

Often, the easiest and most straightforward way to test a custom hook is to create a component that uses it and then test that component instead.

This is one of the very few situations where you do have to use the `act` utility from `react-test-utils`, which is exported for us from `@testing-library/react`.

## Exercise

In this exercise, we have gone back to our simple counter, except now that logic is all in a custom hook and we need to test that functionality. To do that, we'll make a test component that uses the hook in the typical way that our hook will be used and then test that component, indirectly testing our hook.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 fake component

Sometimes it's hard to write a test component without making a pretty complicated "TestComponent." For those situations, you can try something like this:

```javascript
let result
function TestComponent(props) {
  result = useCustomHook(props)
  return null
}

// interact with and assert on results here
```

Learn more about this approach from my blog post: [How to test custom React hooks](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/how-to-test-custom-react-hooks)

### 2. 💯 setup function

Add tests titled:

1. allows customization of the initial count
2. allows customization of the step

And test those use cases. Then abstract away the common logic into a `setup`
function. This one might be a little tricky thanks to variable references, but I
know you can do it!

💰 Here's a little tip. Due to variable references, you'll need to change your
test component a bit:

```javascript
const results = {}
function TestComponent(props) {
  Object.assign(results, useCustomHook())
  return null
}

// interact with and assert on results here
```

### 3. 💯 using react-hooks testing library

Your `setup` function is very similar to the `renderHook` function from
[`@testing-library/react`](https://github.com/testing-library/react-testing-library)!
Swap your own `setup` function with that!

> NOTE: Originally this exercise used `@testing-library/react-hooks` which was
> similar, but that functionality was merged directly into
> `@testing-library/react` so you're going to use that instead.

## 🦉 Elaboration and Feedback

After the instruction, if you want to remember what you've just learned, then
fill out the elaboration and feedback form:

https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Testing%20React%20Applications%20%F0%9F%A7%90&e=08%3A%20testing%20custom%20hooks&em=
